README

This package implements canonical analysis as a means to analyse the
sensitivity of independent variables to a response variable. This
package is an octave implementation of a self-contained package, which
can be loaded into an octave session.

INTRODUCTION


In computer simulations with two inputs and multiple outputs, a
geometrical representation enhances the understanding of the
simulation outputs, especially by representing each output variable as
a contour plot given the inputs. Plotting the contours provides visual
feedback on the sensitivity of each design variable with respect to
the output. In higher dimensions geometrical representations of the
contours becomes more difficult and therefore a more mathematical
analysis is necessary. Canonical analysis is a mathematical framework
to achieve greater insights into the sensitivities of each design
variable in the vicinity of stationary points. This package
implementation is based onthe books by:

"Response Surface Methodology: Process and Product Optimization Using
Designed Experiments (Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics)", by
Myers, Raymond H. and Montgomery, Douglas C. and Anderson-Cook,
Christine M., 2009

"Design and Analysis of Experiments", by Montgomery, Douglas C., 2004

"Response Surfaces, Mixtures, and Ridge Analyses (Wiley Series in
Probability and Statistics)", by Box, George E. P. and Draper, Norman
R., 2007.

Recall that the purpose of building a model of (stochastic) computer
experiments is to find suitable approximations for the true functional
relationship between the independent variables and the simulation
output. A canonical analysis can be conducted to characterise the
nature of the surface in the vicinity of the stationary point, where
the stationary point represents either a point of maximum response, a
point of minimum response, or a saddle point. This assumes that the
stationary point is within the design domain.


Ridge Analysis

Often, in computer simulations with more than one independent variable
it is not unusual to encounter more complex response surfaces that
cannot be characterised as having a pure maximum, minimum or saddle
point. Ridge systems may arise due to some interaction or underlying
dependence among the independent variables (or even not considered
ones). For example, yield contours for an attenuated maximum in two
variables have a banana shape; stationary ridge systems can be
understood as having an optimum on a line; a rising ridge system
displays a stationary point outside the design region. In three
dimensions these systems can easily be investigated by looking at the
contour plots. However, as before with pure optima, with more than two
independent variables a formal study can be of great assistance.

In the most general case, a ridge analysis can be conducted over a
specified region of interest to follow the locus (or path) of a
maximum response. The origin of the path can be situated anywhere
within the design region and following on the path of maximum response
gives a trace of each independent variable. Consequently, variables of
high sensitivity can easily be identified independent of the size of
the design space. Usually, only the paths of steepest ascent or
steepest descent are of interest. However, more paths are easily
constructed. In fact, if there are k independent variables, there
will be k eigenvalues and 2k paths. This can easily be understood
geometrically, where each dimension can be followed towards a minimum
response or a maximum response. This has the advantage that graphical
output can be produced without holding any variables
fixed. Additionally, local optima can be investigated as
well. However, this procedure has its drawbacks as well, because the
respective plots following a defined path are not as easily understood
as contour plots, and the analysis depends on the use of a quadratic
model.

If the ridge analysis is conducted for a model of a real-world system,
then it is often desirable to identify stable regimes for the
independent variables. In an industrial setting, it is often not
possible to operate under exact levels and consequently stable points
are preferred over optimal points that may show erratic behaviour when
departing from optimal settings.
